New blog: JBake (#355)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: content/blog/2021/06/09/StaticWebsiteGenerationWithJavaMavenAndJBake.adoc

= Static website generation with Java, Maven and JBake
ge0ffrey
2021-06-09
:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-tags: community
:jbake-social_media_share_image: staticWebsiteTemplateHierarchy.png

Did you notice?
Last week, we migrated the entire https://www.optaplanner.org/[www.optaplanner.org] website (1399 files)
to build with Java and Maven (instead of Ruby and Rake).
You probably didn't notice. After all, on the face of it, nothing changed.

But in the sources, for our team of Java developers, it is a game changer.
They can now contribute to the website easily.
Within hours of completing the migration, there was already a commit of one of our developers
who would _rather not touch the previous source code with a ten-foot pole_.

[quote]
We built this site. +
We built this site on Java and Maven. +
We built this site. +

> We built this site on JBake and Freemarker.

Reviewer: LOL. Maybe add a 🎶 emoji or something like that, so that people get the reference?

By the way:
https://www.gq.com/story/oral-history-we-built-this-city-worst-song-of-all-time

Author: Clearly the author that article didn't watch your pink unicorns rainbows youtube video. I still have nightmares of that s...

The emoji might cause trouble when JavaCodeGeeks etc repost the blog content.
If some readers aren't old enough to get the joke, so be it :) Not every joke needs to be explained.

+
And it's fast: even a `mvn clean` build of 150 output pages only takes 20 seconds on my machine.

. It's all *Java underneath*.
+
Writing conditional expressions is straightforward.
The APIs (`String.substring()`, ...) are familiar.
Date formatting (`d MMMM yyyy`) and regular expressions behave as expected.
+
And most importantly, error messages are clear.

For 8 years, I wrote the website with Awestruct (Ruby).
But I never took the time to decently learn Ruby, so every change entailed hours of trial and error.
I couldn't just read the error message and fix it.
This isn't Ruby's fault. It was because I never took a few days to actually learn Ruby.
With JBake, I fix errors in a fraction of time: no more trial and error.

== What is JBake?

JBake is a static website generator with many options:

* Build with Maven or Gradle.
+
We choose https://maven.apache.org/[Maven], because all our repos build with Maven
(although two https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts[OptaPlanner Quickstarts] also build with Gradle because OptaPlanner supports Gradle too).

* Write content in Asciidoc, Markdown or HTML.
+
We choose https://asciidoc.org/[Asciidoc]

> because it's richer and more reliable than Markdown and all our documentation is written in Asciidoc.

Reviewer: That's a bold claim to make, "richer and more reliable." Either provide proof, or leave it out.

Author: Good point, I 'll add a link to https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/asciidoc-vs-markdown/
which explains it much better - espeically the "publishing first" approach.

* Create templates with Freemarker, Thymeleaf or Groovy.
+
We choose https://freemarker.apache.org/[Freemarker]
because it's a powerful, battle-tested templating engine.

== Tips and tricks

Here are common tasks to build an advanced static website
and how to implement them in JBake-Freemarker.
You might even call these _JBake Design Patterns_:

=== Use a macro to render shared content

Almost all our templates show the same latest releases panel:

image::staticWebsiteMacroLatestReleases.png[Latest releases screenshot]

> A Freemarker templates is perfect to avoid repeating yourself (DRY):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Freemarker templates is perfect for avoiding repeating yourself (DRY):
```

Author: Pretty sure that "is perfect to avoid" is valid english

Author: See some of the examples here https://www.linguee.com/english-french/translation/it+doesn%27t+have+to+be+perfect.html
